---
title: "Valproic acid-induced changes of 4D nuclear morphology in astrocyte cells"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/paper_1
excerpt: 'Abstract'
date: 2021-08-01
venue: 'Molecular Biology of the Cell'
paperurl: https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/abs/10.1091/mbc.E20-08-0502
citation: 
---

Authors: Alexandr A Kalinin, Xinhai Hou, Alex S Ade, Gordon-Victor Fon, Walter Meixner, Gerald A Higgins, Jonathan Z Sexton, Xiang Wan, Ivo D Dinov, Matthew J O’Meara, Brian D Athey

Abstract: Histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as valproic acid (VPA), have important clini- cal therapeutic and cellular reprogramming applications. They induce chromatin reorganiza- tion that is associated with altered cellular morphology. However, there is a lack of compre- hensive characterization of VPA-induced changes of nuclear size and shape. Here, we quantify 3D nuclear morphology of primary human astrocyte cells treated with VPA over time (hence, 4D). We compared volumetric and surface-based representations and identified sev- en features that jointly discriminate between normal and treated cells with 85% accuracy on day 7. From day 3, treated nuclei were more elongated and flattened and then continued to morphologically diverge from controls over time, becoming larger and more irregular. On day 7, most of the size and shape descriptors demonstrated significant differences between treated and untreated cells, including a 24% increase in volume and 6% reduction in extent (shape regularity) for treated nuclei. Overall, we show that 4D morphometry can capture how chromatin reorganization modulates the size and shape of the nucleus over time. These nu- clear structural alterations may serve as a biomarker for histone (de-)acetylation events and provide insights into mechanisms of astrocytes-to-neurons reprogramming.
